---
layout: post
title:  "Technical Week 7: SQL and NoSQL databases"
date:   2014-07-01 19:48:00
categories: technical
---
![database symbol] ({{ site.url }}/assets/database.png)

###SQL
SQL databases are a form of relational database systems. A SQL database keeps track of data based on relationships organized into tables. SQL or Structured Query Language, refers to the lanaguage used to query the database for information. SQL database requires you to predefine a schema before inserting any piece of information into the database. While this generally makes SQL databases much more rigid and difficult to modify, it also helps maintain data consistency and accuracy. It also reduces data redundancy by ensuring that each piece of information in the database appear only once. This ensures data accuracy and helps to limit the size of databases by avoiding the needless duplication of files across the same database.

###NoSQL
NoSQL, Not only SQL, is a newer alternative to SQL relational databases management systems that come in a variety of implementations and generally provide database solutions that are more easily scalable with better performance. As opposed to a relational database, NoSQL stores information in its system in key-value pairs, doen't require you to predetermine a schema before inserting data. As a result, NoSQL is better able to handle more complex and varied data types that aren't as easily inserted into a SQL schemas. While this allows you to more quickly and easily insert information, it can also sacrifices the consistency and compactness of a relational database system, depending on the implementation. NoSQL systems are better able to scale as well since its more easy to spread your database over multiple servers than with SQL, which generally requires you to store all of your information on a single server.

###My thoughts of SQL vs. NoSQL
As a result of the greater flexibility and ease of scalability, many big data organizations such as Facebook, Google, and LinkedIn utilize NoSQL databases. At this point, I don't have enough experience with SQL or NoSQL to have formed a strong opinions on either system. However, I have been pleasantly surprised so far with my experience using SQL queries to extract information from the database. I find the syntax to be intuitive but still specific enough to extract whatever information I may need from a database. Although, I anticipate that using pre-defined schemas could feel somewhat limiting at first, particularly as I still develop my understanding of the various relationships (i.e. one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many), I do appreciate the act of pre-defining a schema could be a useful exercise in of itself to gain better insight into the information I intend to keep track of in whatever application I may develop that will utilize SQL databases.